before I had a YouTube channel I did
have enough of a web presence that you
could figure out a fair bit about me
what kind of person I am but by poking
around I I've always had a name that's
easy to Google easy to put into Google
and find accurate results unlike someone
named John Smith actually you know
before I met my first wife she googled
me and everywhere she told some
relatives about me and they googled me
and they filmed articles that written
they even found some some receipts from
the political work I did at C Hall in
Toronto there were traces of that for
the internet so I say is it written
articles written and and you could
figure out what kind of person that was
I remember I met face-to-face a young
woman in Taiwan who had done some google
searching about me and one of the things
she said to me once in a while people
ask me questions on this and she
basically said to me look is everything
about politics with you
you know what most is laughing but okay
you said in a positive way you said that
you haven't said it to me in like a
snarky or snide way but once in a while
you kind of do ask question like that
and the reason why this young woman was
was asking she was Chinese but she was
really passionate about English English
literature I think she wants you a
master's in English literature it's not
that and you know in a in a real sense
I'm not I'm interested in literature as
a means to an end that's social or
political or some kind of commentary or
something but literature for the sake of
literature I'm not into gin for the sake
of gin I'm not into you know etc uh uh
so you know she she asked me this
question and she was getting at you know
isn't there something to be said for
reading just for the beauty of reading
or writing you know just for the beauty
of writing but what I find I mean
especially within the field of
literature or in academic fields that
get I think kind of perverted by the
attitudes of literary studies what I
always finds that these people really
fail to appreciate the significance of
the works they're reading and they
utterly fail to grasp the intentions of
the author even when they're explicitly
stated because they're not studying the
social and political context they're
writing in now one of the most extreme
examples
is the politics of Aristotle and and
people read Aristotle like literature
even though the word politics is written
on the cover I have I'm haunted by a
very precise memory I mean my life might
be easier if I shuffle along without
remember these things I'm reading this
book now at age 39 I think the last time
I read this book or tried to read it I
think I was younger than 19 um and I'm
reading it I can remember what my
impressions were of it then what I got
and didn't got to some extent obviously
I don't have a perfect photographic
memory and I can see how how differently
I apprehend the text today but one of
the crucial differences is now partly
thanks to secondary sources that all
I'll provide links to below this this
video partly due to primary sources you
know that I've read and when you put the
pieces together
I really have a sense of the pressure
that Aristotle was under to say things
in support of monarchy and not just any
monarchy but the the Macedonian monarchy
the incredibly brutal and violent empire
that had sprung into existence during
Aristotle's life an empire he had direct
personal contact with and that his
father had direct personal contact with
with before him and an empire that he
evidently vehemently opposed but he was
in a position to state that that
opposition sometimes obliquely and
sometimes directly in a really really
fraught you know political circumstances
now I can't say I can't say nobody
examines the text this way it looks like
starting in the 1970s a small number of
authors wanted to look at aerosol this
way and I've got secondary sources
contemporary scholarship I'm looking and
they have been received very very
negatively so those authors were kind of
lampooned by other scholars saying oh
you want to misrepresent Aristotle you
want to misrepresent aerosol as if he's
a super spy
he's the James Bond working for
Macedonian someone and you know they
showed a real reluctance on the part of
scholars to take seriously the extent to
which the political context shaped
explicitly political writing in in
Athens but in this video very briefly
I'm gonna try to break down for you why
it is that the politics of Aristotle is
still to this day a very difficult text
to interpret and what you must interpret
it in in light of the stated this the
stated intentions of the author not some
psychological theory I'm making up not
not something beneath the surface some
that's on the surface but what you do
have to pick up the pieces and put it
together you have to do the legwork
yourself when I read this at age 19 this
was my thought process whereby I
dismissed the empirical evidence before
me and I frankly just now in doing
reading of contemporary scholars with
PhDs formal academics I think some of
them are making the same mistake as
adults with PhDs that I made when I was
19 or younger and struggling with this
text their first thought is Aristotle is
a famous philosopher and then with that
assumption they look at the biographical
details of his life and dismiss them or
sneer at them thinking that they're
largely made up to to glorify or
glamorize Aristotle so they they see the
story that Aristotle was the tutor to
Alexander the Great as if it's something
made up after the fact because Aristotle
was such a famous name and this could be
because this could be tacked on after
the fact there's absolutely no evidence
to support that attitude you have to
look at the situation the exact opposite
way you have to look at the life of
Aristotle and realize he wasn't a famous
philosopher that happened later in the
biography of his life at least the first
half of it most of his life he's not
famous for anything he's not a famous or
important person he's not from Athens
he's not an Athenian he's not welcome in
Athens he's a hated outsider in an
intensely xenophobic country or
xenophobic city-state of
you want to say it he can in no way
participate in Athenian democracy he's
looking at it from afar as a somewhat
despised northern barbarian now not only
is he a northern barbarian he's a
northern barbarian who is intimately and
directly linked to the house of philip
ii now philip ii right up to the moment
when he was assassinated was the most
important political figure of his era he
was as important to his era as napoleon
bonaparte was in a different era he was
the single most powerful and
unexpectedly powerful political figure
who was suddenly changing the political
landscape of the world conquering
countries subduing nations and
negotiating peace treaties and so on he
and his army were sweeping aside theydo
collected assumptions of former
centuries and totally unexpectedly so
because he was from the perspective of
the athenians a despised uncultured
northern barbarian Aristotle's father
was the medical doctor to philip ii and
the upward social mobility of aristotle
as a person was entirely linked to the
fact that he had these connections to
the court of philip ii now it is by no
means remarkable I mean especially given
all the documentary evidence we have
including the last will and testament of
Aristotle there's quite a lot of
cooperating elements that there's
nothing remarkable about the claim that
Aristotle was one of the tutors who
worked for philip ii in tutoring
alexander the great and again remember
when he got that job alexander the great
wasn't alex the great yet it was by no
means obvious to the people involved
that philip ii would go on to become
this incredibly important historical
figure or that his son would go on to
become an even larger historical figure
that would cast the whole world in his
shadow on the contrary if we delete all
of this biographical evidence that it's
anyway sorry it's it's much it's as real
as any biographical evidence we have for
any ancient figure in the ancient world
there's no reason to regard this as
mythology whatsoever if this were not
true in terms of Occam's razor it would
be incredibly difficult to explain how
this bumpkin from the far north managed
to come back to Athens at precisely the
time when the Macedonians conquered
Athens forced the Athenians into a
humiliating submission set up a garrison
basically occupying Athens after the
destruction of Olympus I just know
that's an I'm not mispronouncing Olympus
this is a different city a city-state
Olympus and indeed there's there's a
later rebellion in which they absolutely
which Alexander absolutely devastates
Thebes these are not the only times that
that Athens rises up in rebellion
against the expanding power of of
Macedonia so by the way one reason why I
wanted to record this video today right
now on the calendar I'm recording this
on the night of June 17 2018 the
political conflict between Greece and
Macedonia ended today it's 18 they just
signed the the peace treaty the mutual
recognition oh you didn't know this the
big news stories today Greece up until
yesterday would not recognize the
existence of Macedonia as a separate
country there are particular modern
reasons for that but that the tensions
do indeed go back to the struggle
between Greece and Macedonia in this
case it was partly the suspicion that
Macedonia would try to conquer some of
the provinces of what's now modern
Greece that historically in the past
were part of ancient Macedonia they try
to reunify the ancient borders in
Macedonia they wanted reassurances for
that but in case this political history
I mean the influence of Aristotle goes
on today in many many ways but
specifically the the cut the political
conflict between Athens in Macedonia
amazingly has continued right down
literally to today when a new agreement
a political agreement was signed between
Greece and Macedonia were for the first
time Greece would recognize Macedonia
and now for the first time Macedonia is
going to be allowed to join
international or
where formerly they were vetoed from a
tree they'll be allowed to join NATO and
the European Union of various United
Nations parties before every single time
Greece would stand up and veto it say no
we we don't we don't we can't
acknowledge we can't admit this hast
that foreign country so for many
different reasons aristotle might be
might be turning over in his grave so if
if Aristotle were not a courtesan if he
weren't a fixture at the court of Philip
the second and then his son Alexander
the Great
how is it that just when Macedon
humiliates conquerors occupies Athens
and Athens that they do surrender I mean
the details of exactly the war Kosar not
really worth we're counting this video
again you can you can click through and
read the primary sources why is it that
how is it or why is it exactly that time
Aristotle shows up and builds a new
school for philosophy he doesn't take
over
Plato's School which is inside the walls
of Athens he sets up a rival school
outside the walls where foreigners are
allowed to live because he's a hated
foreigner he's a hated foreigner on the
side of the Macedonians the despised and
resented conquering army that's trying
to unite the Greeks for their own you
know political purposes but it's an
openly anti-democratic monarchical
despotic regime that's the spread up how
is it that he sets up his own his own
small University would it recall it the
Lyceum outside of the walls and why is
it that he suddenly has to flee from
Athens precisely when Alexander the
Great dies when the news comes back to
Athens that Alexander the Great is dead
and the Athenians start rising in revolt
against Macedonian power that's when he
arrives that's when he leaves his
patronage is clear even in his last will
and testament his connection to the the
Macedonian government the Macedonian
region appointed to rule greased logs
and arose away fighting wars is very
clear and we even have the indictments
against him from the Athenian
perspective which include indictments
against him after his
death because he died thereafter but we
have the evidence of him being denounced
by the Athenians for working for the
Macedonian side all right so the the I
mean ultimately it's even the ancient
sources say this he fled Athens because
he didn't want to share the fate of
Socrates the charge that was laid
against him while he was there while he
was in Athens and well it was alive was
impiety or heresy was a religious
judgment was very clear that it was it
was political politically motivated as
was the case with Socrates and then you
know as I said we actually have further
evidence after he already died of him
further being denounced by the people of
Athens showing the attitude of Athenian
Democrats toward him okay so there is
absolutely every reason when you
understand this political context there
is every reason why I should have fixed
my color before filming us didn't even
think - that's right politics in pajamas
hashtag politics in pajamas there are
the every reason for Aristotle to be
writing in a staunchly Pro Macedonian
way in a staunchly promot narky way in a
staunchly anti-democratic way in this
book and he's not he's being profoundly
subversive he's biting the hand that
feeds him he's being a very harsh critic
of exactly the regime that he's relied
on for his subsistence for a survival
his whole life including right there in
Athens where he's despised by the
Athenians you must read the book in that
context to have any clue about what's
going on this is for the ancient world
this is a remarkably long book it's a
remarkably detailed book and he pulls in
particular examples and he names
particular rulers from across the map
including remote and obscure small towns
in what's now Turkey so when he wants to
you know prove a point he'll say oh well
you know when you have a democracy and
then you it becomes corrupt because you
have demagogues that are taking bribes
this sort of problem can happen for
example and he'll name these obscure
rulers and these obscure cities from
years of history before this happened he
did a lot of research in the sense
drawing together these kinds of examples
and we have the names of different
rulers and demagogues and Democratic
leaders preserved in this book they come
up in passing this way as examples to
prove his point how many times does the
name of Alexander the Great
appear in this book from Aristotle zero
Alexander the Great who when this book
was written was the dominant figure in
the politics of the known world his name
is not mentioned even once despite the
fact that Aristotle knew him personally
was one of his teachers not his only
teacher by any means search the
imagination the Aristotle and his father
before him had both been employees of
king philip ii the father of Alexander
the Great he was incredibly close to
that regime and yet what he wrote for
hundreds of pages a remarkably long book
in many ways his life's work what he
devoted his whole life to building up to
it is a very strange indictment of
empire monarchy war itself kingship the
inevitable injustice of having one man
rule over others and I say this I could
now follow this up with a long essay or
a long series of videos he says this
straining against what I think is not
just censorship but a very real fear for
his life when Aristotle left the employ
of philip ii when he ceased to be the
tutor for Alexander the Great he
nominated his replacement and his
replacement was an historically real
person I did check in it's the the
legend about this or the story about
this is not the only proof we have this
was a real person this was a real
historical incident if you read the
account as stated by doji's Laertes
who's as reliable as any
durable sources were ever gonna get for
this period of history
Diogenes Lera tea has simply says that
Aristotle nominated this other somewhat
famous philosopher known known to
history historically noted philosopher
to replace him as a tutor and as the
advisor at the court of King Philip the
second but he spoke too freely he was
put in a cage he was tortured and then
he was fed to lions
after a long slow painful death that was
an event that had a lot of witnesses
that was an event that was recorded for
history by many sources so if you said
one word that crossed King Philip or his
son Alexander the Great if you weren't
sufficiently flattering if you weren't
careful about what you said you could
end up dead this is the political
context in which Aristotle wrote a
deeply conflicted strangely
self-censored in some ways strangely
self-contradictory work and it's a work
that today remains difficult for people
to interpret but you can interpret it
you can get the point you just have to
overcome this strange culture of reading
these things as literature you have to
look at the work and the intention of
the author in its historical and
political context